The author of the reading passage asserts that the construction of Mosia, the statues carved out of volcanoes, lead to the decline and collapse of the Islans's culture. However, the lecturer speaks opposite to this claim. Based on recent research, the lecturer concludes that the culture did not decline in the island due to Mosai. 
First of all, the author of the passage claims that huge rocks were moved for the construction of Mosai statues. Inorder to move the rocks, tracks were constructed which led to deforestation. HOwever, the lecturer reveals that rocks were not carries by tracks, instead ropes were used to move rocks. So, no trees were harmed or cut in the process of building the moses.
Secondly, the author of the passage contends that Island lacked trees due to construction of Mosai. However, the lecturer highlighted a different cause for the lack of trees in the region. THe auithor pointed out that first visitors to the islans=d brought rats with them. THese rats were meant tpo serve as food for the new habitants. HOwever, they proved to be harnmful for the palm trees in the region. THese rats attacked the palm trees and damaged them. THis was the main reason for the deforestation in the region.
Finally, the passage asserts that population of the island peaked at twenty thousNand when the Europeans first visited. However, this is based on the assumption that populations started in 400AD. However, the lecturer prevents evidence to weaken this fact. The lecturer claims that based on the recent carbon dating, island is likely to start in 1200AD. So, based on this fact, it is not possible for the population to grow to twenty thousand in small duration after which the Europeans first visted the island. THis clearly weakens the claim of the passage's author that the poopulation declined due to the constructuion of the Mosia islands. The author of the passage said that population declined due to shortage of food and deforestation. HOwever, based on the eveidence presented by the lecturer, it is not true.
